3 Weird Machines from Serena Butler's TV Typewriter 

by Travis Goodspeed 

In the good old days, one could make the argument-however fraudulent !-t hat 
memory corruption exploits were only used by the bad guys, to gain remote code 
execution against the poor good guys. The clever folks who wrote such exploits were 
looked upon as if they were kicking puppies, and though we all knew there was a 
good use for that technology, we had little more than RMS's paranoid ramblings 
about fascism to present as a legitimate use-case. Those innocent days in which 
exploit authors were derided as misfits and sinners are beginning to end, as children 
must now use kernel exploits to program their own damned cell phones. If we as 
authors of weird machines are to prepare for the future, it might be a good idea to 
work out a plan of last resort. What could be build if computers themselves were 
outlawed? 

I'm writing to share with you the concept of a Butlerian Typewriter, loosely 
inspired by Cory Doctorow's 28C3 lecture and strongly inspired by many good nights 
of fine scotch with Sergey Bratus, Meredith Patterson, Len Sassaman, Bx Shapiro, 
and Julian Bangert. It's a little thought experiment about what weird machines 
could be constructed in a world that has outlawed Turing-completeness. 

In the universe of Frank Herbert's Dune, the war on general-purpose computing is over, and the computers 
lost — but not before they struck first, enslaved humanity, and would have eliminated it if it were not for one 
Serena Butler. St. Serena showed the way by defenestrating a robotic jailer, leading the rest of humanity in 
the Butlerian Jihad against computers and thinking machines. Having learned the hard way that building 
huge centralized systems to run their lives was not a bright idea, humans banned anything that could grow 
into one. 

So general-purpose computers still exist on the black market, and you can buy one if you have the 
right connections and freedom from prosecution, but they are strictly and religiously illegal to possess or 
manufacture. The Orange Catholic Bible commands, "Thou shalt not make a machine in the likeness of a 
man's mind." 

Instead of general purpose computers, Herbert's society has application-specific machines for various 
tasks. Few would argue that a typewriter or a cat picture are dangerous, but your iPhone is a heresy. Siri 
would be mistaken for the Devil himself. 

Let's simplify this rule to Turing-completeness. Let's imagine that it is 
illegal to possess or to manufacture a Universal Turing Machine. This means 
no ELF or DWARF interpreters, no HTML5 browsers. No present-day CPU 
instruction set is legal either; not ARM, not MIPS, not PowerPC, not X86, 
and not AMD64. Not even a PDP11 or MSP430. Pong would be legal, but 
Ms. Pac-Man would not. In terms of Charles Babbage's work, the Difference 
Engine would be fine but the Analytical Engine would be forbidden. 

Now comes the fun part. Let's have a competition between Ada Lovelace 
and Serena Butler. Serena's goal is to produce what we will call a Bulterian 
Typewriter, an application-specific word processor of sorts. She can use any 
modern technology in designing the typewriter, as such things are available 
to her from the black market. She even has access modern manufacturing 
technology, so producing microchips is allowed if they are not Turing-complete. 
She may not, however, produce anything contrary to the O.C.B.'s prohibition 
against thinking machines. Nothing Turing-complete is legal, and even her 
social standing isn't sufficient to get away with mass production of computers. 

So Serena designs a Butlerian Typewriter using black market tools like 
Verilog or VHDL, then mass produces it for release on the white market as a consumer appliance with no 
Turing machine included. One might imagine that she would begin with a text buffer, wiring its output to 
